What if machines could learn, adapt, and communicate just like people? This is now a reality in the fascinating world of artificial intelligence, where technology becomes more human. Now let's explore the fundamental technology underlying generative AI and see how these developments are influencing our future. In this video, you will explore the foundational concepts of AI, including machine learning, deep learning, and neural networks. And you'll also understand the core technologies that drive advancements in generative AI. Artificial intelligence, or AI, involves creating systems that can perform tasks requiring abstract pattern recognition such as learning, reasoning, and problem-solving. Before we get started, we need to understand the terms associated with AI so that we can fully grasp the possibilities of AI. So let's consider the differences between AI, machine learning, deep learning, and neural networks. AI means "artificial intelligence" and refers to any algorithm or technology that relies on advanced pattern recognition and instead of traditional, deterministic algorithms. Machine learning (ML) is a subset of artificial intelligence, AI, that focuses on developing algorithms to learn from and make predictions or decisions based on data. These algorithms identify and capture patterns within datasets, enabling systems to improve their performance over time without being explicitly programmed for each specific task. Neural networks are a specific algorithms in machine learning and a method by which we can "learn" from data. Although the name implies they work similarly to the human brain, neural networks do not "learn" in a way similar to humans, nor do they resemble the human brain. Structurally, the human brain is much more complex. Deep learning refers to machine learning with neural networks. The word "deep" refers to the fact that typically, deep neural networks have many layers and consume vast amounts of data. Machine learning algorithms and neural network architectures are fundamental to the capabilities of generative AI. In fact, these technologies enable systems to learn from the data without explicit instructions. This is a very powerful idea since it presents a fresh way of defining an issue. In traditional computing, one needs to specify the problem, its inputs, its outputs, and the procedure that performs the solution. In artificial intelligence-based solutions, the user will only specify the inputs and the outputs, and the AI algorithm learns to perform the solution. While there are similarities, machine learning algorithms and neural network architectures have significant differences. Machine learning algorithms are more broad than neural network architectures. A machine learning algorithm specifies from what data a neural network may use to learn. These learning paradigms include various types of learning. First, they have supervised learning, which means training on labeled data. Second, they have unsupervised learning, which entails finding patterns in unlabeled data. And finally, they have reinforcement learning, which is learning by interacting with the environment.
Neural network architectures are structures that perform the learning. They may be modified or enhanced to fit the specifics of the problem they must solve. Think of machine learning algorithms as an activity that involves driving and the neural network architectures as the car. For instance, a different car will probably be needed from driving to and from home than for racing. As certain problem domains involve similar characteristics, special kinds of neural networks have emerged. Accordingly, a widely used architecture well-suited for image processing includes convolutional neural networks, which are also known as CNNs, whereas recurrent neural networks, also known as RNN's, have emerged as a sensible choice for sequential data like text and speech. Each type of network is designed to handle specific data types and tasks optimizing performance for those areas. Distinguishing between the different components of AI helps us understand their unique roles and contributions. Understanding different kinds of architecture can also help us understand the motivations behind new ones, for example, the transformer, a deep learning architecture that powers ChatGPT and many other state-of-the-art large language models like GPT 4.0, was initially created to address the information bottleneck and traditional RNNs like LSTMD, which stands for long short-term memory, and GRUs are gated recurrent units. Knowing the difference allows us to apply the right technology to the right problem. For instance, CNNs are used for image-related tasks, while RNN's handle time series or sequence-related tasks. Now let's unpack more differences in the components of AI. First, what is the difference between machine learning and deep learning? Machine learning encompasses a whole wide range of algorithms, while deep learning specifically involves neural networks with many layers. Crucially, deep neural networks are equipped with the ability to learn extremely complex patterns. Then, what is the difference between neural networks and traditional algorithms? Traditional algorithms follow explicit rules set by programmers, whereas neural networks learn and adapt from the data. This makes neural networks more flexible but also more complex to train and understand.
We have explored the foundational concepts of artificial intelligence focused on key areas such as machine learning, deep learning, and neural networks. We've identified the basic technologies driving generative AI and distinguished between the key AI components. You now have a foundational understanding of AI. How can you apply these concepts in your projects? Continue exploring AI, understand the nuances of different technologies, and think critically about how they can solve real-world problems.